Updated documentation for upcoming VSCode extension release (#288)
lf-lang/lf-lang.github.io: docs/tools/code-extension.mdx

description: Visual Studio Code Extension for Lingua Franca.
---

import Image from '@theme/IdealImage';
import lingo_packages from '../assets/images/vs_code/lingo_packages.png';
import local_libraries from '../assets/images/vs_code/local_libraries.png';
import error_message from '../assets/images/vs_code/error_message.png';

The Lingua Franca extension for Visual Studio Code (VS Code) provides syntax-directed editing capability, compilation, diagram synthesis and a package explorer for Lingua Franca programs.

## Usage

### Creating a New Package

You can create a new LF package either manually by creating an LF file or by using the [Lingo Package Manager](https://github.com/lf-lang/lingo).

#### Option 1: Manually Create an LF File
1. Go to <kbd>File > New File...</kbd> and select `New Lingua Franca File`.
2. Save the file in a directory called `src` to ensure that generated code is placed in a parallel `src-gen` directory. For example, if your file is called `Foo.lf`, the directory structure after building will look like this:

```

> ├── LF Package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
├── .
```

│   ├── bin/
│   │  └── Foo
│   ├── src/
│   │  └── Foo.lf
│   ├── src-gen/
│   │  └── Foo/
...
```

> Additionally, it's important to manually create the `Lingo.toml` file adjacent to the `src` folder in the root directory of the package.. This file serves as a configuration for the package, allowing you to specify the package name, version, and other metadata, including any dependencies you want to install.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you manually create the `Lingo.toml` file, place it adjacent to the `src` folder in the root directory of the package. This file serves as a configuration for the package, allowing you to specify the package name, version, and other metadata, including any dependencies you want to install.
```

#### Option 2: Create an LF Package Using the Lingo Package Manager

> 1. After installing and configuring the Lingo Package Manager, create an empty folder with the desired name for the LF package.

Reviewer: What configuration procedure are you referring to? Also, maybe provide a link to where to get `lingo`?

Reviewer: Also, I think this should be option 1, leaving the manual procedure as an alternative.

Author: > What configuration procedure are you referring to? Also, maybe provide a link to where to get `lingo`?

I was referring to setting up the path for executing the `lingo` command in the terminal. However, perhaps "setup" is a better term than "configuring".

Reviewer: Still not sure what you mean by "setting up the path"...

Author: I mean the PATH environment variable

Reviewer: Isn't installing `lingo` as easy as running `cargo install`? I would just refer to https://www.lf-lang.org/docs/next/installation#lingo for the details.

2. Open the folder in VS Code.
3. Open the terminal in this folder and run the <kbd>lingo init</kbd> command. 

This will set up a new LF package with the following structure:

```

> ├── LF Package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
├── .
```

│   ├── src/
│   │  └── Main.lf
└── └── Lingo.toml # Configuration file for current package
```

### Opening an Existing LF package

To open an existing LF package in VS Code, select the root directory of your Lingua Franca package as your workspace.

The correct structure of the LF package should look like this:

```

> ├── root

Reviewer: ```suggestion
├── .
```

> The correct structure of the LF package should look like this:

Author: Well, it makes sense. I can move it into the glossary under `Project Structure`

│   ├── bin/
│   ├── build/   # directory containing packages installed by Lingo Package Manager
│   │  ├── lfc_include/ # Directory for storing reusable reactors
│   │  └── └── installed_library/
│   ├── include/
│   ├── src/
│   │  ├── lib/ # Directory for storing reusable reactors
│   │  │   ├── Input.lf # Ex: reactor capturing external inputs (e.g., Microphone, Camera)
│   │  │   └── ComputerVision.lf # Ex: reactor performing computer vision tasks (e.g., object detection, face recognition)
│   │  └── Main.lf # Ex: main source file
└── └── Lingo.toml # Configuration file for Lingo Package Manager
```

> To correctly enable the [Package Explorer](#package-explorer), we recommend opening VS Code with the true root of your Lingua Franca package as your workspace. If the package structure deviates from the expected format, an error message will appear when opening the Package Explorer:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable the [Package Explorer](#package-explorer), the workspace of your VS Code editor must be the root of a Lingua Franca package. If the workspace is not recognized to be a valid Lingua Franca package, an error message will appear when opening the Package Explorer:
```

description: Visual Studio Code Extension for Lingua Franca.
---

> The Lingua Franca extension for Visual Studio Code (VS Code) provides syntax-directed editing capability, compilation, diagram synthesis and a packages explorer for Lingua Franca programs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Lingua Franca extension for Visual Studio Code (VS Code) provides syntax-directed editing capability, compilation, diagram synthesis and a package explorer for Lingua Franca programs.
```

src-gen/Foo
```

> Overall, we encourage you to open your project in VS Code using the following structure to fully leverage the features of the VS Code extension:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note
We recommend selecting the root of your Lingua Franca package as your workspace in VS Code. This will enable the package explorer.
:::
```

```

> ├── root

Reviewer: This stuff should be mentioned before the "creating a new file" stuff and should probably mention `lingo init`.

Author: I would rename the `Create new file` section to `Create new project` and include information on the correct project structure, `lingo init` command, along with details on the error encountered if this structure is missing.

Reviewer: Yes, that makes sense, modulo the package/project discussion that we're having :-)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
├── .
```

You can also build and immediately afterwards run your code by opening the command palette (<kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>P</kbd>) and then entering `Lingua Franca: Build and Run`.
Running the code can also be done from the VS Code terminal by executing the generated file in `./bin`.

### Packages Explorer

> The **Lingua Franca Packages Explorer** can be accessed by clicking on the **LF icon** in the activity bar on the left side of the screen. Once opened, the **Packages Explorer** displays a **Tree View** with the following structure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Lingua Franca Package Explorer** can be accessed by clicking on the **LF icon** in the activity bar on the left side of the screen. Once opened, the **Package Explorer** displays a **Tree View** with the following structure:
```

```
├── LF Project
│   ├── Installed Packages
│   ├── Local Libraries
└── └── Source Files
```

- [**Installed Packages**](#installed-packages): Lists libraries installed via the Lingo Package Manager, located in the `build/lfc_include` directory (if any).
  
- [**Local Libraries**](#local-libraries): Displays locally defined libraries (e.g., reusable reactors), located in the `src/lib` directory.
  
- [**Source Files**](#source-files): Contains the LF source files created by the developer, located in the `src` directory.

The **Source Files** section is always present as it reflects the main LF files in the project. However, the **Installed Packages** and **Local Libraries** sections appear only if the respective directories and files exist in the workspace.

Hovering over the **LF Project** item reveals a terminal icon. Clicking this icon opens a terminal window at the project's root directory, allowing you to execute commands directly within that directory.

#### Installed Packages

> The **Installed Packages** section lists libraries installed using the [Lingo Package Manager](https://github.com/lf-lang/lingo). Developers can use the Lingo Package Manager to retrieve and install LF programs from repositories such as the [Lingua Franca Community Organization](https://github.com/LF-Community).

Reviewer: - [ ] discuss naming of GitHub org

> The **Installed Packages** section lists libraries installed using the [Lingo Package Manager](https://github.com/lf-lang/lingo). Developers can use the Lingo Package Manager to retrieve and install LF programs from repositories such as the [Lingua Franca Community Organization](https://github.com/LF-Community).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Installed Packages** section lists libraries installed using the [Lingo package manager](https://github.com/lf-lang/lingo). Developers can use the Lingo package manager to retrieve and install LF programs from arbitrary GitHub repositories. A collection of useful packages can be found in the [Lingua Franca Packages](https://github.com/lf-pkgs) GitHub organization.
```

To install libraries:
1. Configure the `Lingo.toml` file with the desired libraries.
2. Run `lingo build` to download the specified dependencies.

Once the libraries are installed, they will appear in the `{project_name}/build/lfc_include/` directory. The **Installed Packages** section will then be structured as follows:

> ```shell

Reviewer 2: Nit: if it is not shell command just use 
`````
```
`````

Author: Right, thank you

├── LF Project
│   ├── Installed Packages
│   │  ├── installed_library/
│   │  │   ├── File_1.lf
│   │  │   │   ├── Rusable_Reactor_1.lf
│   │  │   │   ├── Rusable_Reactor_2.lf
│   │  │   ├── File_2.lf
│   │  │   │   ├── Rusable_Reactor_1.lf
│   │  │   │   ├── Rusable_Reactor_2.lf
...
```

In this structure:

> - **LF Project**: Represents the root folder of the main project.

Reviewer: It seems like we mix the term "package" and "project" a lot. Maybe we should only use one?

Author: The `project` refers to the Lingua Franca project, while `packages` are the libraries installed and defined within it

Reviewer: Well, to me, packages and projects are kind of the same. Once you create one, you can publish it, and someone else can use it. It looks like Rust also uses "package" and "project" interchangeably: 

See https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/guide/creating-a-new-project.html; in this definition they shed some light on the relationship between project and package: https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/appendix/glossary.html#package

Note that the "package explorer" to me is a view into the current package (not an explorer of package found inside of the current project).

Author: In a way, it's a bit ambiguous since they say: 
> ### [Project](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/appendix/glossary.html#project)  
> Another name for a [package](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/appendix/glossary.html#package).

However, it makes sense to me to standardize the use of `package` instead of `project`. But in doing so (as in Rust), the word `package` would essentially become another name for `project`, right?

Reviewer: Jep. I think the most important thing here is to all agree on what we mean when we use these terms. I like the Rust approach of providing definitions; we should do the same.

Author: I agree. In that case, adding a `Glossary` page would be a great solution

Author: For now, should I add the `Glossary` with the definition of `LF Package` under the `Notes` section?

Reviewer: A new page would be better. We have lots of definitions that can use explaining.

![Installed Packages section](../assets/images/vs_code/lingo_packages.svg)

The hierarchy categorizes tree items into the following types:

1. **`library-root`**: Refers to the root folder of each downloaded library.
2. **`file`**: Represents an LF program within the library.
3. **`reactor`**: Refers to individual reactors within the LF program.

When focusing on the **Installed Packages** section, an `edit` command becomes available. Clicking it opens the `Lingo.toml` file in the editor for configuration changes. The following actions are available for items in the **Installed Packages** section:

- For **file** items (from right to left):
  - **Open in Split View**: Opens the file in a split editor view.
  - **Go To File**: Navigates to the file in the editor.
  
- For **reactor** items (from right to left):
  - **Import Selected Reactor**: Imports the selected reactor into the active LF program.
  - **Go To File**: Opens the file where the reactor is defined.
  - **Open in Split View**: Opens the file in a split editor view (accessible by right-clicking the item).

> > **Note**: The **Import Selected Reactor** option is available only if an LF program is open in the editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note
The **Import Selected Reactor** option is available only if an LF program is open in the editor.
:::
```

  
- For **reactor** items (from right to left):
  - **Import Selected Reactor**: Imports the selected reactor into the active LF program.
  - **Go To File**: Opens the file where the reactor is defined.
  - **Open in Split View**: Opens the file in a split editor view (accessible by right-clicking the item).

> **Note**: The **Import Selected Reactor** option is available only if an LF program is open in the editor.

#### Source Files

The **Source Files** section lists all LF programs in the `{project_name}/src/` directory. This section provides direct access to the main source files of the project. The hierarchy for this view is straightforward:

```
├── LF Project
...
│   ├── Local Libraries
│   │  ├── File_1.lf
│   │  ├── File_1.lf
│   │  ├── File_1.lf
...
```

Clicking on any of the files will open the corresponding LF program in the editor, allowing developers to quickly navigate to and edit the source code of their project.

#### Correctness of Project Structure

If the project structure deviates from the expected format, an error message will appear:

![Project structure error](../assets/images/vs_code/error_message.svg)

> To avoid errors, follow the [project structure guidelines](#creating-a-new-file).

Reviewer: This should probably refer to a "creating a new project" paragraph

You can also build and immediately afterwards run your code by opening the command palette (<kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>P</kbd>) and then entering `Lingua Franca: Build and Run`.
Running the code can also be done from the VS Code terminal by executing the generated file in `./bin`.

### Package Explorer

The **Lingua Franca Package Explorer** can be accessed by clicking on the **LF icon** in the activity bar on the left side of the screen. Once opened, the **Package Explorer** displays a **Tree View** with the following structure:

```

> ├── LF Package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
├── <Package Name>
```

#### Installed Packages

The **Installed Packages** section lists packages installed using the [Lingo Package Manager](https://github.com/lf-lang/lingo). Developers can use the Lingo Package Manager to retrieve and install LF programs from repositories such as the [Lingua Franca Community Organization](https://github.com/LF-Community).

To install packages:
1. Configure the `Lingo.toml` file with the desired package.
2. Run <kbd>lingo build</kbd> in the terminal from the current directory to download the specified dependencies.

Once the packages are installed, they will appear in the `./build/lfc_include/` directory. The **Installed Packages** section will then be structured as follows:

```
├── <Package Name>
│   ├── Installed Packages
│   │  ├── installed_package/
│   │  │   ├── File_1.lf
│   │  │   │   ├── Rusable_Reactor_1.lf
│   │  │   │   ├── Rusable_Reactor_2.lf
│   │  │   ├── File_2.lf
│   │  │   │   ├── Rusable_Reactor_1.lf
│   │  │   │   ├── Rusable_Reactor_2.lf
...
```

In this structure:
- **\<Package Name\>**: Represents the root folder of the main package.

> - **installed_package**: Represents each package listed in `Lingo.toml`, which contains one or more LF projects featuring reusable reactors.

Reviewer: Is this literal or a variable? I'm guessing the latter, in which case it should be something like:
```suggestion
- **<Installed Package>**: Represents each package listed in `Lingo.toml`, which contains one or more LF projects featuring reusable reactors.
```

Author: Yes, it is a variable

The image below shows a visual representation of the **Installed Packages** section. The **project** icon indicates the LF Package folder (e.g., `AudioClassification`), while the **root-folder** icon represents the downloaded package (e.g., the `edgeai` package in the example). The **code file** icon denotes an LF program within a package, and the **bracket** icon represents individual reactors inside the LF program.

<Image img={lingo_packages} style={{maxWidth: 400}} />

The hierarchy categorizes tree items into the following types:

> 1. **`package-root`**: Refers to the root folder of each downloaded package.

Author: The idea is to explain the hierarchy in the picture so:
- `package-root` = installed_package
- `file` = `File_x.lf`
- `reactor` = `Rusable_Reactor_x.lf`

> 1. **`package-root`**: Refers to the root folder of each downloaded package.

Reviewer: I still don't understand what it refers to. `package-root` is found nowhere in the text, neither are `file` or `reactor` (besides in these lists of definitions).

> 1. **`package-root`**: Refers to the root folder of each downloaded package.

Author: I’m outlining the following hierarchy, where each item has a specific role:

```
├── <Package Name>
│   ├── Installed Packages
│   │  ├── <Installed Package> # package-root
│   │  │   ├── File_1.lf # file
│   │  │   │   ├── Rusable_Reactor_1.lf #reactor
│   │  │   │   ├── Rusable_Reactor_2.lf
│   │  │   ├── File_2.lf
│   │  │   │   ├── Rusable_Reactor_1.lf
│   │  │   │   ├── Rusable_Reactor_2.lf
...
```

> 1. **`package-root`**: Refers to the root folder of each downloaded package.

Reviewer: I'm not sure it adds much honestly; the layout is pretty self-descriptive. Maybe just delete this text?

> 1. **`package-root`**: Refers to the root folder of each downloaded package.

Author: It’s useful for listing the actions associated with each item:

> - For **file** items (from right to left):
>   - **Open in Split View**: Opens the file in a split editor view.
>   - **Go To File**: Navigates to the file in the editor.
>   
> - For **reactor** items (from right to left):
>   - **Import Selected Reactor**: Imports the selected reactor into the active LF program.
>   - **Go To File**: Opens the file where the reactor is defined.
>   - **Open in Split View**: Opens the file in a split editor view (accessible by right-clicking the item).

> 1. **`package-root`**: Refers to the root folder of each downloaded package.

Reviewer: Maybe just use boldface then, and not typewriter. (It suggests code.)

3. **`reactor`**: Refers to individual reactors within the LF program.

When focusing on the **Installed Packages** section, an `edit` command becomes available. Clicking it opens the `Lingo.toml` file in the editor for configuration changes. The following actions are available for items in the **Installed Packages** section:

- For **file** items (from right to left):
  - **Open in Split View**: Opens the file in a split editor view.
  - **Go To File**: Navigates to the file in the editor.
  
- For **reactor** items (from right to left):
  - **Import Selected Reactor**: Imports the selected reactor into the active LF program.
  - **Go To File**: Opens the file where the reactor is defined.
  - **Open in Split View**: Opens the file in a split editor view (accessible by right-clicking the item).

:::note
The **Import Selected Reactor** option is available only if an LF program is open in the editor.
:::

#### Local Libraries

The **Local Libraries** section lists LF programs created by the developer, located in the `./src/lib/` directory. These programs serve as local libraries, containing reusable reactors. The directory structure follows this format:

```

> ├── LF Package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
├── .
```

<Image img={local_libraries} style={{maxWidth: 400}} />

The hierarchy categorizes tree items into two types:

1. **`file`**: Represents the LF program.
2. **`reactor`**: Represents a reactor within the LF program.

Actions for **Local Libraries** are similar to those in the [**Installed Packages**](#installed-packages) section:

- For **file** items (from right to left):
  - **Open in Split View**: Opens the file in a split editor view.
  - **Go To File**: Navigates to the file in the editor.
  
- For **reactor** items (from right to left):
  - **Import Selected Reactor**: Imports the selected reactor into the active LF program.
  - **Go To File**: Opens the file where the reactor is defined.
  - **Open in Split View**: Opens the file in a split editor view (accessible by right-clicking the item).

:::note
The **Import Selected Reactor** option is available only if an LF program is open in the editor.
:::

#### Source Files

The **Source Files** section lists all LF programs in the `./src/` directory. This section provides direct access to the main source files of the package. The hierarchy for this view is straightforward:

```

> ├── LF Package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
├── <Package Name>
```

...
│   ├── Local Libraries
│   │  ├── File_1.lf
│   │  ├── File_2.lf
│   │  ├── File_3.lf
...
```

> Clicking on any of the files will open the corresponding LF program in the editor, allowing developers to quickly navigate to and edit the source code of their package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clicking on any of the files will open the corresponding LF program in the editor, allowing you to quickly navigate to and edit the source code of your package.
```

In this structure:
- **\<Package Name\>**: Represents the root folder of the main package.
- **\<Installed Package\>**: Represents each package listed in `Lingo.toml`, which contains one or more LF projects featuring reusable reactors.

The image below shows a visual representation of the **Installed Packages** section. The **project** icon indicates the LF Package folder (e.g., `AudioClassification`), while the **root-folder** icon represents the downloaded package (e.g., the `edgeai` package in the example). The **code file** icon denotes an LF program within a package, and the **bracket** icon represents individual reactors inside the LF program.

<Image img={lingo_packages} style={{maxWidth: 400}} />

The hierarchy categorizes tree items into the following types:

> 1. **package-root**: Refers to the root folder of each downloaded package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **package root**: Refers to the root folder of each downloaded package.
```

In this structure:
- **\<Package Name\>**: Represents the root folder of the main package.

> - **<Installed Package>**: Represents each package listed in `Lingo.toml`, which contains one or more LF projects featuring reusable reactors.

Reviewer: Sorry the `<` and `>` need to be escaped. My bad!

Author: Yes, I’ve already corrected this part. I’ll make the modifications and commit all the updates together
